v4.0.0-alpha.38 (#2434)
mui-org/material-ui-x: CHANGELOG.md

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 4.0.0-alpha.38

> _Jul 23, 2021_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Aug 23, 2021_
```

> _Jul 23, 2021_

Reviewer 2: 😁

```suggestion
_Aug 23, 2021_
```

Big thanks to the 6 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

> - 🚀 Introduce row editing feature (#2098) @m4theushw

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 🚀 Introduce the [row editing](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/editing/#row-editing) feature (#2098) @m4theushw
```

> - 🚀 Introduce row editing feature (#2098) @m4theushw

Reviewer: Could we develop more on this new feature? I think that we could, link the docs, and likely show a screen recording to make it very clear on what's about.

Author: A link was added

- ⚛️ Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli
- ⚡️ Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw
- ✨ Move packages to `@mui` scope (#2341) @oliviertassinari

> - 💡 Remove `apiRef` from all `options` callback params (#2312) @DanailH

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 💡 Add the `details` param to all callbacks (#2312) @DanailH
```

Author: That is not what this PR does.

This is the last alpha release. We are moving to beta in the next release, next week.

### `@mui/x-data-grid@v4.0.0-alpha.38` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v4.0.0-alpha.38`

#### Breaking changes

- [DataGrid] Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli
  The CSS classes `.Mui-odd` and `.Mui-even` were removed from the row. Use the `:nth-child(odd|even)` selector to replace them.

- [DataGridPro] Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw

  ```diff

>   - import { XGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  -import { XGrid } from '@material-ui/x-grid';
```

>   - import { XGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
>   + import { DataGridPro } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';

Reviewer 2: We've been using only one space between the sign and the modified line.

```suggestion
  -import { XGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
  +import { DataGridPro } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
```

x the other diffs.

>   + import { DataGridPro } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  +import { DataGridPro } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
```

  ```

- [core] Move packages to `@mui` scope (#2341) @oliviertassinari

  ```diff

>   - import { DataGrid } from '@material-ui/data-grid';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  -import { DataGrid } from '@material-ui/data-grid';
```

>   + import { DataGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  +import { DataGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid';
```

  ```

  ```diff
  - import { LicenseInfo } from '@material-ui/x-grid';
  + import { LicenseInfo } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
  ```

> - [DataGrid] Remove `apiRef` from all `options` callback params (#2312) @DanailH

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `DataGridPro`. (#2312) @DanailH
```

  ```diff

>   export interface GridColumnHeaderParams {

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need to add a diff for each interface. They are all the same. I would remove them or include one line mentioning all.

Author: Removed

    * The column of the current header component.
    */
    colDef: GridStateColDef;
    -  /**
    -  * API ref that let you manipulate the grid.
    -  */
    - api: any;
  }
  ```

  ```diff
  export interface GridColumnOrderChangeParams {
    * The old column index.
    */
    oldIndex: number;
    -  /**
    -   * API ref that let you manipulate the grid.
    -   */
    -  api: any;
  }
  ```

  ```diff
  export interface GridColumnResizeParams {
    * The column of the current header component.
    */
    colDef: GridStateColDef;
  -  /**
  -   * API ref that let you manipulate the grid.
  -   */
  -  api: any;
  ```

  ```diff
  export interface GridColumnVisibilityChangeParams {
    * The column of the current header component.
    */
    colDef: GridStateColDef;
  -  /**
  -   * API ref that let you manipulate the grid.
  -   */
  -  api: any;
  ```

  ```diff
  export interface GridRowParams {
    * All grid columns.
    */
    columns: GridColumns;
  -  /**
  -   * GridApiRef that let you manipulate the grid.
  -   */
  -  api: any;
  ```

  ```diff
  export interface GridRowScrollEndParams {
    * The grid visible columns.
    */

>     visibleColumns: GridColumns;

Reviewer: Could you fix all the git diff? I have stopped suggesting changes, there are too many instances. Please replicate the output of `git diff`. 

```suggestion
     visibleColumns: GridColumns;
```

Author: they are now removed

  -  /**
  -   * API ref that let you manipulate the grid.
  -   */
  -  api: any;
  ```

>   - All DataGrid props callbacks don't provide access to `api` anymore. To access `api` you need to use `DataGridPro` and access it from the details parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [DataGridPro] The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `api` property available in the new `details` param.
```

  ```

>   <DataGridPro
>     onColumnResize={(params, event, details) => console.log(details.api)}
>   />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  -<DataGridPro onColumnResize={(params, event, details) => console.log(params.api)} />
  +<DataGridPro onColumnResize={(params, event, details) => console.log(details.api)} />
```

  ```

>   - `GridStateChangeParams` is removed, instead `onStateChange` first param is `GridState`.
>   ```diff
>   - onStateChange?: (params: GridStateChangeParams, event: MuiEvent<{}>, details: any) => void;
>   + onStateChange?: (state: GridState, event: MuiEvent<{}>, details: any) => void;
>   ```

Reviewer 2: This prop is internal. I don't think we need to document.

```suggestion
```

#### Changes

> - [DataGrid] Don't apply `box-sizing: border-box` on everything (#2330) @m4theushw

Reviewer: I would propose we describe the value, not the what

```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Fix `box-sizing: border-box` leak (#2330) @m4theushw
```

- [DataGrid] Fix keyboard navigation header regression (#2342) @oliviertassinari

> - [DataGrid] Keep prop-types in the same file (#2345) @oliviertassinari

Reviewer: It's a detail, developers don't need to care

```suggestion
- [core] Keep prop-types in the same file (#2345) @oliviertassinari
```

> - [DataGrid] Remove `apiRef` from all `options` callback params (#2312) @DanailH

Reviewer: A breaking change?

> - [DataGrid] Remove private API from the export (#2299) @oliviertassinari

Reviewer: A breaking change?

Author: In the PR it's said not to list that breaking change.

- [DataGrid] Replace hard coded classes with `gridClasses` (#2320) @m4theushw
- [DataGrid] Introduce row editing feature (#2098) @m4theushw

> - [DataGrid] TypeScript module augmentation for theme (#2307) @ZeeshanTamboli

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Add TypeScript module augmentation for the theme (#2307) @ZeeshanTamboli
```

- [DataGrid] Use `rowIndex` relative to visible rows on keyboard navigation (#2336) @m4theushw

### Docs

- [docs] Add `Row & Cell editing` in features list (#2396) @ZeeshanTamboli
- [docs] Add redirect from `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2389) @m4theushw
- [docs] Fix docs for `onEditRowsModelChange` prop (#2394) @ZeeshanTamboli
- [docs] Fix docs links and pagination sentence (#2381) @ZeeshanTamboli
- [docs] Fix `onCellEditCommit` param type (#2390) @ArthurPedroti
- [docs] Update the icons for the new branding (#2339) @oliviertassinari

### Core

- [core] Simplify `useGridColumns` hook (#2343) @oliviertassinari
- [core] Reduce `options` internal usage (#2318) @flaviendelangle
- [core] Remove `DataGridPropTypes` (#2432) @flaviendelangle

> - [core] Stop using `options.scrollbarSize` (#2317) @flaviendelangle

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [core] Remove usages of `options.scrollbarSize` (#2317) @flaviendelangle
```

- [core] Update `doesSupportTouchActionNone` implementation (#2378) @DanailH
- [core] Upgrade dependency with the monorepo (#2377) @oliviertassinari
- [test] Use `.not.to.equal` in favour of `to.not.equal` (#2340) @oliviertassinari

## 4.0.0-alpha.37

> _Jul 12, 2021_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Aug 12, 2021_
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 4.0.0-alpha.38

_Aug 23, 2021_

Big thanks to the 6 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- 🚀 Introduce the [row editing](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/editing/#row-editing) feature (#2098) @m4theushw
- ⚛️ Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli
- ⚡️ Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw
- ✨ Move packages to `@mui` scope (#2341) @oliviertassinari
- 💡 Add the `details` param to all callbacks (#2312) @DanailH

This is the last alpha release. We are moving to beta in the next release, next week.

### `@mui/x-data-grid@v4.0.0-alpha.38` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v4.0.0-alpha.38`

#### Breaking changes

- [DataGrid] Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli

>   The CSS classes `.Mui-odd` and `.Mui-even` were removed from the row. Use the `:nth-child(odd|even)` selector to replace them.

Reviewer: Please no, this doesn't work

```suggestion
  The CSS classes `.Mui-odd` and `.Mui-even` were removed from the row.
```

- [DataGridPro] Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw

  ```diff

>   -import { XGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';

Reviewer: So it's actionable for developers

```suggestion
  -import { XGrid } from '@material-ui/x-grid';
```

  +import { DataGridPro } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
  ```

- [core] Move packages to `@mui` scope (#2341) @oliviertassinari

  ```diff
  -import { DataGrid } from '@material-ui/data-grid';
  +import { DataGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid';
  ```

  ```diff
  -import { LicenseInfo } from '@material-ui/x-grid';
  +import { LicenseInfo } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
  ```

- [DataGrid] The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `DataGridPro`. (#2312) @DanailH
  The `api` property is no longer available in the callback params. To access the API, use the `api` propertyfrom the new `details` param.

>   ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
  ```diff
````

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 4.0.0

> _Aug 23, 2021_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Aug 24, 2021_
```

> The first official stable release of `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`. It supports `@material-ui/core` v4 and has partial support for v5. From this release on new features for the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components will be released under version `5.0.0-beta.0` and have full support for `@material-ui/core` v5. Support for existing users on v4 will still be provided via patch releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the first official stable release of `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`. It supports `@material-ui/core` v4 and has partial support for v5. From this release on new features for the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` components will be released under version `5.0.0-beta.0` and will have full support for `@material-ui/core` v5. Support for existing users on v4 will still be provided via patch releases.
```

Big thanks to the 6 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- 🚀 Introduce the [row editing](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/editing/#row-editing) feature (#2098) @m4theushw
- ⚡️ Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` as part of the new branding (#2382) @m4theushw
- ✨ Move packages to `@mui` scope as part of the new branding (#2341) @oliviertassinari
- 💡 The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `DataGridPro` (#2312) @DanailH

### `@mui/x-data-grid@v4.0.0` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v4.0.0`

#### Breaking changes

- [DataGrid] Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli
  The CSS classes `.Mui-odd` and `.Mui-even` were removed from the row.

- Move packages to `@mui` scope and rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2341) @oliviertassinari (#2382) @m4theushw

>   As part of the new branding, the packages scope changes from `@material-ui` to `@mui`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  As part of the new branding, the packages scope changed from `@material-ui` to `@mui`.
```

>   Renaming from `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` is to align the component and [plan names](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/getting-started/#feature-comparison)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Renaming from `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` is to align the component and [plan names](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/getting-started/#feature-comparison).
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 4.0.0-alpha.38

_Aug 23, 2021_

Big thanks to the 6 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- 🚀 Introduce the [row editing](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/editing/#row-editing) feature (#2098) @m4theushw
- ⚛️ Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli
- ⚡️ Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw
- ✨ Move packages to `@mui` scope (#2341) @oliviertassinari

> - 💡 The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `DataGridPro`. (#2312) @DanailH

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 💡 The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `DataGridPro` (#2312) @DanailH
```

This is the last alpha release. We are moving to beta in the next release, next week.

### `@mui/x-data-grid@v4.0.0-alpha.38` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v4.0.0-alpha.38`

#### Breaking changes

- [DataGrid] Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli
  The CSS classes `.Mui-odd` and `.Mui-even` were removed from the row.

- [DataGridPro] Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw

  ```diff
  -import { XGrid } from '@material-ui/x-grid';
  +import { DataGridPro } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
  ```

- [core] Move packages to `@mui` scope (#2341) @oliviertassinari

  ```diff
  -import { DataGrid } from '@material-ui/data-grid';
  +import { DataGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid';
  ```

  ```diff
  -import { LicenseInfo } from '@material-ui/x-grid';
  +import { LicenseInfo } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
  ```

> - [DataGrid] The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `DataGridPro`. (#2312) @DanailH

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] The `api` property was removed from the callback params (#2312) @DanailH

  To access the API, use the `DataGridPro` and get it from the new `details` param. 
```

  ```diff

>   -<DataGridPro onColumnResize={(params, event, details) => console.log(params.api)} />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  -<DataGridPro onColumnResize={(params, event) => console.log(params.api)} />
```

  +<DataGridPro onColumnResize={(params, event, details) => console.log(details.api)} />
  ```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 4.0.0

_Aug 23, 2021_

> This is the first offitial stable release of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`. It supports `@material-ui/core` v4 and has a partial support for v5. From this release on we will release new features for the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` under version `5.0.0-beta.0` and have full support for `@material-ui/core` v5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the first official stable release of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`. It supports `@material-ui/core` v4 and has partial support for v5. From this release on we will release new features for the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` under version `5.0.0-beta.0` and have full support for `@material-ui/core` v5.
```

> This is the first offitial stable release of the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro`. It supports `@material-ui/core` v4 and has a partial support for v5. From this release on we will release new features for the `DataGrid` and `DataGridPro` under version `5.0.0-beta.0` and have full support for `@material-ui/core` v5.

Author: @oliviertassinari I need some inspiration regarding this freestyle text 😅

Reviewer: I have a few ideas on how to expend it

Author: Updated

Big thanks to the 6 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

> - 🚀 Introduce the [row editing](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/editing/#row-editing) feature (#2098) @m4theushw

Reviewer: I think that we could add a quick screen recording to explain what the feature is about (for the lazy developers). I could do it if we find the proposal valuable.

- ⚛️ Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli
- ⚡️ Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw
- ✨ Move packages to `@mui` scope (#2341) @oliviertassinari
- 💡 The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `DataGridPro` (#2312) @DanailH

This is the last alpha release. We are moving to beta in the next release, next week.

> ### `@mui/x-data-grid@v4.0.0-alpha.38` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v4.0.0-alpha.38`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `@mui/x-data-grid@v4.0.0` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v4.0.0`
```

#### Breaking changes

- [DataGrid] Remove unused row CSS classes (#2327) @ZeeshanTamboli
  The CSS classes `.Mui-odd` and `.Mui-even` were removed from the row.

- [DataGridPro] Rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw

  ```diff
  -import { XGrid } from '@material-ui/x-grid';
  +import { DataGridPro } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
  ```

> - [core] Move packages to `@mui` scope (#2341) @oliviertassinari

Reviewer: I think that we could group these two changes, they are in the end, a single migration step for developers.

  ```diff
  -import { DataGrid } from '@material-ui/data-grid';
  +import { DataGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid';
  ```

>   ```diff
>   -import { LicenseInfo } from '@material-ui/x-grid';
>   +import { LicenseInfo } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
>   ```

Reviewer: I guess most developers don't care about the exported `LicenseInfo` type.

```suggestion
```

Author: I think this just showcases the difference in the import

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 4.0.0

_Aug 24, 2021_

> 🎉 This is the first official stable release of the data grid component 🎉!

Author: Hmm 😃  "first stable release" also has a nice ring to it.

We have been iterating on the component for [18 months](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/commit/705cb0f387b5f3aa056bf40c4183a2342b317447). With the latest introduction of the [row edit](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/editing/#row-editing) feature, a load of bug fixes, and a polish of the documentation. We believe the component deserves a stable release.

The MUI X v4.0.0 release supports [MUI Core](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui) v4 and has partial support for v5-beta. With the soon-to-be-released v5 version of the core components, we are moving ongoing work to the v5 release line (Core and X).

> The support for existing developers on MUI v4 might be degraded going forward, we encourage you to migrate to MUI Core v5-beta and soon MUI X v5-beta.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bug fixes will still be released for existing developers on MUI v4. Although, new features will be released only in the MUI X v5. We encourage everyone to migrate to MUI Core v5-beta, and soon the MUI X v5-beta.
```

> The support for existing developers on MUI v4 might be degraded going forward, we encourage you to migrate to MUI Core v5-beta and soon MUI X v5-beta.

Reviewer: > No, sorry, we've been over this a few times. We have customers who have paid for 12 months support on the v4 version. That's the minimum amount of time that we must continue to support v4 with fixes, even if not new features. Welcome to the world of commercial software. 😅

@mbrookes I personally don't see the issue: https://material-ui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/

<img width="738" alt="Capture d’écran 2021-08-25 à 16 21 14" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/130808188-1708f358-2826-4dcf-9ec4-85b4ba50bdee.png">

Big thanks to the 6 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- 🚀 Introduce the [row editing](https://material-ui.com/components/data-grid/editing/#row-editing) feature (#2098) @m4theushw

  <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/130665023-3c0730ab-502e-4da1-8bc1-d572427ad2d6.gif" width="851" height="382" />

> - ⚡️ Rename the name of the `XGrid` component to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ⚡️ Rename the `XGrid` component to `DataGridPro` (#2382) @m4theushw
```

  This should help clarify the products vs. plans separation. [MUI X](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x) is a product line on its own. It contains MIT and Commercial software. Removing X from the name of the paid components should help remove a possible confusion: the MIT version of X is meant to be valuable enough for developers to use it, without feeling that it's crippled compared to other OSS alternatives.

>   The Pro prefix should help make it clear what's MIT and what's not.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The Pro suffix should help make it clear what's MIT and what's not.
```

- ✨ Rename the `@material-ui` npm scope to `@mui` (#2341) @oliviertassinari

>   This is part of the ongoing rebranding of the project and company. Material-UI is our current official name. However, we are going to change it. It's too long to write, read, pronounce. It associates us top much with Material Design. In the near future, the whole project/company is moving to MUI and https://mui.com/.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This is part of the ongoing rebranding of the project and company. Material-UI is our current official name, however, we are going to change it. It's too long to write, read, and pronounce; and it is too closely associated with Material Design. In the near future, the whole project/company is moving to MUI and https://mui.com/.
```

- 💡 The `api` property was removed from the callback params. To access the API, use the `DataGridPro` (#2312) @DanailH

### `@mui/x-data-grid@v4.0.0` / `@mui/x-data-grid-pro@v4.0.0`

#### Breaking changes

- [DataGrid] Move packages to `@mui` scope and rename `XGrid` to `DataGridPro` (#2341, #2382) @m4theushw @oliviertassinari
  You can find in the above highlight section why we are making these name changes. You can migrate following these steps:

  ```diff
  -import { DataGrid } from '@material-ui/data-grid';
  +import { DataGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid';
  ```

  ```diff
  -import { XGrid } from '@material-ui/x-grid';

>   +import { DataGridPro } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  +import { DataGridPro as XGrid } from '@mui/x-data-grid-pro';
```

Author: This seems like something devs can add themselves. I think it's better to just move away from `XGrid`.

Reviewer 3: The diff is incomplete without either this, or an example of renaming a call. This is a working diff, and makes it clear that there's more to do to clean up the naming.
